Heart disease describes a range of conditions that affect your heart. Heart diseases include:

    Blood vessel disease, such as coronary artery disease
    Heart rhythm problems (arrhythmias)
    Heart defects you're born with (congenital heart defects)
    Heart valve disease
    Disease of the heart muscle
    Heart infection

Many forms of heart disease can be prevented or treated with healthy lifestyle choices.
Symptoms

Heart disease symptoms depend on what type of heart disease you have.
Symptoms of heart disease in your blood vessels

A buildup of fatty plaques in your arteries, or atherosclerosis (ath-ur-o-skluh-ROE-sis) can damage your blood vessels and heart. Plaque buildup causes narrowed or blocked blood vessels that can lead to a heart attack, chest pain (angina) or stroke.

Coronary artery disease symptoms may be different for men and women. For instance, men are more likely to have chest pain. Women are more likely to have other signs and symptoms along with chest discomfort, such as shortness of breath, nausea and extreme fatigue.

Signs and symptoms can include:

    Chest pain, chest tightness, chest pressure and chest discomfort (angina)
    Shortness of breath
    Pain, numbness, weakness or coldness in your legs or arms if the blood vessels in those parts of your body are narrowed
    Pain in the neck, jaw, throat, upper abdomen or back

You might not be diagnosed with coronary artery disease until you have a heart attack, angina, stroke or heart failure. It's important to watch for cardiovascular symptoms and discuss concerns with your doctor. Cardiovascular disease can sometimes be found early with regular evaluations.
Heart disease symptoms caused by abnormal heartbeats (heart arrhythmias)

Your heart may beat too quickly, too slowly or irregularly. Heart arrhythmia signs and symptoms can include:

    Fluttering in your chest
    Racing heartbeat (tachycardia)
    Slow heartbeat (bradycardia)
    Chest pain or discomfort
    Shortness of breath
    Lightheadedness
    Dizziness
    Fainting (syncope) or near fainting

Heart disease symptoms caused by heart defects

Serious heart defects that you're born with (congenital heart defects) usually are noticed soon after birth. Heart defect signs and symptoms in children could include:

    Pale gray or blue skin color (cyanosis)
    Swelling in the legs, abdomen or areas around the eyes
    In an infant, shortness of breath during feedings, leading to poor weight gain

Less serious congenital heart defects are often not diagnosed until later in childhood or during adulthood. Signs and symptoms of congenital heart defects that usually aren't immediately life-threatening include:

    Easily getting short of breath during exercise or activity
    Easily tiring during exercise or activity
    Swelling in the hands, ankles or feet

Heart disease symptoms caused by diseased heart muscle (cardiomyopathy)

In early stages of cardiomyopathy, you may have no symptoms. As the condition worsens, symptoms may include:

    Breathlessness with activity or at rest
    Swelling of the legs, ankles and feet
    Fatigue
    Irregular heartbeats that feel rapid, pounding or fluttering
    Dizziness, lightheadedness and fainting

Heart disease symptoms caused by heart infection

Endocarditis is an infection that affects the inner lining of your heart chambers and heart valves (endocardium). Heart infection signs and symptoms can include:

    Fever
    Shortness of breath
    Weakness or fatigue
    Swelling in your legs or abdomen
    Changes in your heart rhythm
    Dry or persistent cough
    Skin rashes or unusual spots

Heart disease symptoms caused by heart valve problems (valvular heart disease)

The heart has four valves — the aortic, mitral, pulmonary and tricuspid valves — that open and close to direct blood flow through your heart. Many things can damage your heart valves, leading to narrowing (stenosis), leaking (regurgitation or insufficiency) or improper closing (prolapse).

Depending on which valve isn't working properly, valvular heart disease signs and symptoms generally include:

    Fatigue
    Shortness of breath
    Irregular heartbeat
    Swollen feet or ankles
    Chest pain
    Fainting (syncope)

When to see a doctor

Seek emergency medical care if you have these heart disease signs and symptoms:

    Chest pain
    Shortness of breath
    Fainting

Always call

911 or emergency medical help if you think you might be having a heart attack.

Heart disease is easier to treat when detected early, so talk to your doctor about your concerns regarding your heart health. If you're concerned about developing heart disease, talk to your doctor about steps you can take to reduce your heart disease risk. This is especially important if you have a family history of heart disease.

If you think you may have heart disease, based on new signs or symptoms you're having, make an appointment to see your doctor.
Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic
Causes

Heart disease causes depend on your specific type of heart disease. There are many different types of heart disease. To understand the causes of heart disease, it helps to understand how the heart works.

How the heart works
Your heart is a pump. It's a muscular organ about the size of your fist, located slightly left of center in your chest. Your heart is divided into the right and the left sides.

    The right side of the heart includes the right atrium and ventricle. It collects and pumps blood to the lungs through the pulmonary arteries.
    The lungs give the blood a new supply of oxygen. The lungs also breathe out carbon dioxide, a waste product.
    Oxygen-rich blood then enters the left side of the heart, including the left atrium and ventricle.
    The left side of the heart pumps blood through the largest artery in the body (aorta) to supply tissues throughout the body with oxygen and nutrients.

Heart valves

Four heart valves keep your blood moving the right way by opening only one way and only when they need to. To work properly, the valves must be formed properly, must open all the way and must close tightly so there's no leakage. The four valves are:

    Tricuspid
    Mitral
    Pulmonary
    Aortic

Heartbeats

A beating heart squeezes (contracts) and relaxes in a continuous cycle.

    During contraction (systole), your ventricles squeeze tight, forcing blood into the vessels to your lungs and body.
    During relaxation (diastole), the ventricles are filled with blood coming from the upper chambers (left and right atria).

Electrical system

Your heart's electrical wiring keeps it beating. Your heartbeat controls the continuous exchange of oxygen-rich blood with oxygen-poor blood. This exchange keeps you alive.

    Electrical signals begin high in the upper right chamber (right atrium) and travel through specialized pathways to the ventricles, delivering the signal for the heart to pump.
    The system keeps your heart beating in a coordinated and normal rhythm, which keeps blood flowing.

Causes of coronary artery disease

A buildup of fatty plaques in your arteries (atherosclerosis) is the most common cause of coronary artery disease. Unhealthy lifestyle habits, such as a poor diet, lack of exercise, being overweight and smoking, can lead to atherosclerosis.
Causes of heart arrhythmia

Common causes of arrhythmias or conditions that can lead to arrhythmias include:

    Coronary artery disease
    Diabetes
    Drug abuse
    Excessive use of alcohol or caffeine
    Heart defects you're born with (congenital heart defects)
    High blood pressure
    Smoking
    Some over-the-counter medications, prescription medications, dietary supplements and herbal remedies
    Stress
    Valvular heart disease

In a healthy person with a normal, healthy heart, it's unlikely for a deadly arrhythmia to develop without some outside trigger, such as an electrical shock or the use of illegal drugs. However, in a heart that's diseased or deformed, the heart's electrical signals may not properly start or travel through the heart, making arrhythmias more likely to develop.
Causes of congenital heart defects

Congenital heart defects usually develop while a baby is in the womb. Heart defects can develop as the heart develops, about a month after conception, changing the flow of blood in the heart. Some medical conditions, medications and genes may play a role in causing heart defects.

Heart defects can also develop in adults. As you age, your heart's structure can change, causing a heart defect.
Causes of cardiomyopathy

The cause of cardiomyopathy, a thickening or enlarging of the heart muscle, may depend on the type:

    Dilated cardiomyopathy. The cause of this most common type of cardiomyopathy often is unknown. The condition usually causes the left ventricle to widen. Dilated cardiomyopathy may be caused by reduced blood flow to the heart (ischemic heart disease) resulting from damage after a heart attack, infections, toxins and certain drugs, including those used to treat cancer. It may also be inherited from a parent.
    Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This type usually is passed down through families (inherited). It can also develop over time because of high blood pressure or aging.
    Restrictive cardiomyopathy. This least common type of cardiomyopathy, which causes the heart muscle to become rigid and less elastic, can occur for no known reason. Or it may be caused by diseases, such as connective tissue disorders or the buildup of abnormal proteins (amyloidosis).

Causes of heart infection

A heart infection, such as endocarditis, is caused when germs reach your heart muscle. The most common causes of heart infection include:

    Bacteria
    Viruses
    Parasites

Causes of valvular heart disease

Many things can cause diseases of your heart valves. You may be born with valvular disease, or the valves may be damaged by conditions such as:

    Rheumatic fever
    Infections (infectious endocarditis)
    Connective tissue disorders

More Information

    Heart disease care at Mayo Clinic
    Omega-6 fatty acids

Risk factors

Risk factors for developing heart disease include:

    Age. Growing older increases your risk of damaged and narrowed arteries and a weakened or thickened heart muscle.
    Sex. Men are generally at greater risk of heart disease. The risk for women increases after menopause.
    Family history. A family history of heart disease increases your risk of coronary artery disease, especially if a parent developed it at an early age (before age 55 for a male relative, such as your brother or father, and 65 for a female relative, such as your mother or sister).
    Smoking. Nicotine tightens your blood vessels, and carbon monoxide can damage their inner lining, making them more susceptible to atherosclerosis. Heart attacks are more common in smokers than in nonsmokers.
    Poor diet. A diet that's high in fat, salt, sugar and cholesterol can contribute to the development of heart disease.
    High blood pressure. Uncontrolled high blood pressure can result in hardening and thickening of your arteries, narrowing the vessels through which blood flows.
    High blood cholesterol levels. High levels of cholesterol in your blood can increase the risk of plaque formation and atherosclerosis.
    Diabetes. Diabetes increases your risk of heart disease. Both conditions share similar risk factors, such as obesity and high blood pressure.
    Obesity. Excess weight typically worsens other heart disease risk factors.
    Physical inactivity. Lack of exercise also is associated with many forms of heart disease and some of its other risk factors as well.
    Stress. Unrelieved stress may damage your arteries and worsen other risk factors for heart disease.
    Poor dental health. It's important to brush and floss your teeth and gums often, and have regular dental checkups. If your teeth and gums aren't healthy, germs can enter your bloodstream and travel to your heart, causing endocarditis.

Complications

Complications of heart disease include:

    Heart failure. One of the most common complications of heart disease, heart failure occurs when your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs. Heart failure can result from many forms of heart disease, including heart defects, cardiovascular disease, valvular heart disease, heart infections or cardiomyopathy.
    Heart attack. A blood clot blocking the blood flow through a blood vessel that feeds the heart causes a heart attack, possibly damaging or destroying a part of the heart muscle. Atherosclerosis can cause a heart attack.
    Stroke. The risk factors that lead to cardiovascular disease can also lead to an ischemic stroke, which happens when the arteries to your brain are narrowed or blocked so that too little blood reaches your brain. A stroke is a medical emergency — brain tissue begins to die within just a few minutes of a stroke.
    Aneurysm. A serious complication that can occur anywhere in your body, an aneurysm is a bulge in the wall of your artery. If an aneurysm bursts, you may face life-threatening internal bleeding.
    Peripheral artery disease. When you develop peripheral artery disease, your extremities — usually your legs — don't receive enough blood flow. This causes symptoms, most notably leg pain when walking (claudication). Atherosclerosis also can lead to peripheral artery disease.
    Sudden cardiac arrest. Sudden cardiac arrest is the sudden, unexpected loss of heart function, breathing and consciousness, often caused by an arrhythmia. Sudden cardiac arrest is a medical emergency. If not treated immediately, it results in sudden cardiac death.

